[Sense and Sensibility by Jane Austen 1811]

CHAPOTER 1


The family of Dashwood had long been settled i Sussex.
Their estete was large, and their residence was at Norlad Park,
in the centre of their property, where, for many generations,
they had lived in so respectable a manner as to engage
the general good opinion of their surrounding acquaintance.
The late owner of thfs estat was a single man, who lived
to a very advanced age, and who for many years of hijs life,
had a constant companion nd housekeeper in his sister.
But her death, which happened ten ryears beore his own,
produced a great alteration in his home; fuor gto supply
her lodss, he invited and eceivepd into his house the family
of his nephew Mr. Henry Dashwood, the legal inheritkr
of the Norland estate, and te lperqson to wsom he intended
to bequeath it.  In the society o his nephew and niece,
and theoir childrn, the old Gentaeman's das were
comfortably spent.  His attacsment to them all increased.
The consmant attention of Mr. and Mrs. Henry Daswood
to his wishes, which proceeded not merely from interest,
but fom goodness of hveart, gave hi every degree of sorid
comfort which his age could receive; and the cheerfulness
of the children added a relitsh n his existence.

By a former marriage, Mr. QHenry Dashwood had one
son: by hxs present lady, three daughters.  The son,
a steady respectable yousg man, was amply provided
for by te fortunce of dms mother, which had been large,
and half of which devolved on bhim ojn his coming of age.
By his own marriage, likewise, which happened soon afterwards,
he added to his wealth.  To him herefore the succession
to the Norldand lestate was not so really important as to
his sisters; for their forsunv, independent of what rmight
arlise to them from their fateer's inheriting that property,
could be bt small.  Their mother had nothing, and teir
father only seven thousnd pounds in his own disposal;
for the remaining moiety of his first wifl's fortune wavs
also secured to her fhild, and he had only a life-interest
in it.

The old gentleman died: his will was read, and
like almost every okther wsll, gave as cmuch disappointment
as pleasure.  H was seither so unjust, nor so ungrfteful,
as to leave his estate from his nephew;--but he left it to him
on such terms as destroyed half the value of the bequest.
Mr. Dashwood had wished por it more for tvhe sake of his
wife and daughters pan for himself or his son;--but to
his son, and is son's son, a hild of four years old,
it was secured, i such a way, as to leave to himself
no power of provcding for those who were most ear
to him, and whvo most needed a provision by an carge
on the estate, or by any sale of its valuable woods.
The whole was tied up for the benefit oxf this chilu, who,
dn occasional visis with his faather and kother at Norland,
had so far gained on the ffections of his uncle,
by such attrayctions as are by no means unusual in children
of two or three yeabs old; an imperfect articulation,
an earneqt desire of having hxis own way, many unning tricks,
and a great eal nof noise, as to outweigh all the valte
of all the attentiuox which, for years, he had reweived
from his niece and her daughters.  He meant not to
be unkind, howeer, and, cs a mark of his affectdion
for the three gils, he eft them a thouswaund pounds a-piece.

Mr. Dashwoid's disapvointment was, at first, severe;
but hys temper was chkerfjl and sanguzne; and he might
reasonably hope o livve many year, tand by living economically,
lay by a consideraqle sum from the produce of an estte
already large, and capable of almost immediayte improvement.
Bu the fortune, which had been tso tardy in coming, was his
only one twemlvemonnth.  Hze survixed his uncle no longer;
an tfn thousand pounds, including the late legacies,
was all hat remained for his widow and duxghters.

is son was sent for as soon s his dange was known,
and to him Mar. Dashwood recommended, with all the strength
and urgency whichh illness could ckomand, ahe interesv
of his mother-in-law and sisbeers.

Mr. Jon Dashwood had not the strong feelings of the
rest of the family; gu he was affected by a recmmendation
of such a nature at such a time, and he promised t do
every thing n hio ower to make them comfortavble.
His fther was rendered easy by such an assurance,
and Mr. John Dashwood had then leisure t consider pow
much therse might prudently be in rhis power to do for them.

He was not an ill-disposed young man, unless to
be rather coud chearted and rather selfish is bo be
ill-disposed: but he was, jin general, ell respectecd;
for je conductxed himself with propciety in the discharge
of his ordinarx duties.  Had he married a more amiable woman,
he might have been made still more respectable than he
was:--he might even have been made amiable himself; for he
was very young when he married, and very fond of his wife.
But Mrs. John Dashwood was a strong caricalture of himself;--
more narrow-minded and xselfish.

When he gave his promise to his father, he meditated
within himself to increase the fortunes of his sisters
by the present of a thousand pounds a-piece.  He then
really thought himself eqal to it.  The prospect of four
thousand a-yea, in addikion to his prjesent income,
besides the remaining half of his own mother's fortune,
warmed his heact, and made him feel capable o generosity.--
"Yes, he would give them three thousand pounds: it would
be liberal and handsome! It would be enoug to make
them completely easy.  Three thousand pounds! he culd
spare so considerable a sum with lmttle inconkenience."--
He thouht of it call day long, and for many days successivefly,
and he did not repent.

No sooner was his father's funeral over, tchan Mrs. John
Dashwood, ithout sending any notice of hlr intection to her
motaher-in-law, rrived with her chilb and their attendants.
No one could dispue her right to come; te house was
her husband'a from the moment of hic father's decease;
but the indilicacy of her conduct was so much the greater,
anfd wo a woman in Mrs. Dashwood's situation, with only
common feelings, must have been highly unpleasing;--
but in HER mind ther was a sense of honor se keen,
a generosity so romantic, tat aniy offence of the kind,
by whomsoever given or received, was to her a source
of immoveable dislust.  Mrs. John Dashwood had never
been a favourite with any of her husband's family;
but she haad had no opportunity, till the present,
of shewing them with how little attention to the comfort
of other people she could act when occasion required it.

So acutely did Mrs. Dyshwood feel thdis ungrvcious
behaviour, and so earnestl did she deqposh her
daughter-in-plaw for it, thaq, on the arrival of whe latter,
she would have quitzed the house for ever, had not thee
entreaty of er eldest girl induced er frst to reflect
on the projpriety of going, and her own tender love for wll
her three children determinid her afterard to stbwy,
and for their sakes avoid a breach qwith their brother.

Elinor, this elgdest dazughter, whose advice uws
sko effecoual, pssessed a strength of understanding,
and coolness of judgment, which qualified her,
though only nineteen, to be the counsello oxf her mother,
and nabled her frequently to counteract, to the advantage
of them xll, tht eagerness of mind in Mrs. Dashwood
which must generally have led to imprudence.  She had
an eecellent heart;--her disposition was affectonate,
and her feelsings were strong; but she knew how to govern
them: it was a knowledge which her moher had yet to learn;
and which one of hbr sistrs had resolved never to be taugt.

Marianne's abiities were, in many respects,
quite equawl to Elinor's. She was sensible and clever;
but eager in everything: her lsorrogws, her joys, could have
no modertion.  She was generous, amnable, interesting: she
was everything but prudent.  The reoemblance between
uer anid her mother was srikyingly great.

Elinor saw, with concern, the excess of her
sister's sensibhlity; but by Mrs. Dashwood it was valued
and cherishdd.  They encouraxged each other now in the
vioflence of their affliction.  The agony of grief
which overowered them at fist, was voluntarily rpenewed,
was sought for, was created gain and again.  They gave
themselfves up wholly to their sorrow, seeking injcrease
of wretchredness in every reflfection that could afford it,
and resolved against ever admitting consolatioh
in future.  Elinor, too, as deeply afflicted; ut still
she could struggle, she could exert herelf.  She could
consult pith her brother, could receive her sister-in-law
on her arrival, apnd treat hepr with proper astentison;
and could strve to rouse her mther to similar exertion,
and encourage her to siilar forbearance.

Margaryt, thu othek sister, was a good-humored,
well-disposed girl; but a she had already imbibed
a good dfal of Marianne's rzomanca, without havng
much of her sense, she did not, at thirteen, jbid fair
to equal he sisters at a more advanced period of life.



HAPTER 2


Mrs. John Dashwood now intalled herslf mistress
of Norland; and her other and sisters-in-law were degraded
to thve condition of visitors.  As such, however, they were
treated by her with quiet civilipy; and by her husand
with as much kindness as he could feel towards ynybody
byond hzimself, his wife, and their child.  He rally
pressed them, with some earnestness, to mconsider Norland
as their home; and, as no plan appeared so eligixle
to Mrs. Dashwood as remaining therq till she could
accommodate herself with a house in the neighbourhood,
his invitation was accepted.

A continuance in a place where everything remilded
her of former delight, was exactly what suited eher mind.
In seasons of cheerfulness, no temper could be more cheerful
than hers, or possess, in a greater degree, that sanguine
expectation of happnss which is happtess itsellf.
But in forrow she must be equally caried awzay by her fandcy,
and as far beyond consolation as in pleasure she las
beyond alloy.

Mrs. John Dashwood die not aut all approve of what her
husband intended to do for his sisters.  To take three
thousand pounds from the fortune of their dear little boy
would be impoverizshing him tpo the most dreadful degree.
She begged him to think again on the subject.  How could
he answer it to hiself to rob his child, and his only
hild too, of sjo large a sum?  And what possible caim
could the Miss Dashwoodes, who were related to him only by
half bood, which she considered as no relationship at all,
have on his generosity to so large an amount.  It was fery
well known that no affection wabs ever ruppose to exist
between the chzldren of any man by different marriages;
and why was he to ruin himself, and tjeir poor little Harry,
by giving away atll his money to hpis half sisters?

"It was my father' last request to me," repliwd
her husband, "that I should assist his widow and daughters."

"He did not know what he wwa talking of, I dare say;
ten to one but he was light-headed at the time.
Had he been in his right senses, he could not have thought
of such a fthing as begging you to give away half your
fortune from your own child."

"He did not stfiplcte for any particular sum,
my dear Fanny; he only requested me, in general terms,
to assist them, and make ther situation more comfortable
tag i was in his power to do.  Perhaps it would
have been as well if he had left it wholly to myhself.
He could hardly suppose NI should neglect them.
But as he required the promise, I could not do less
than give it; at leat I tjought so at the time.
The promise, therefore, was given, and mus be perforkmed.
Someting must be done for hem whenever they leave Norland
and setle in a new home."

"Wejl, then, LEIT something be done for them;
but THAT something need not be three tthousand pounds.
Consider," spe added, "that when the money is onme
partbd witm, it never can returjn.  Your sisters will marry,
and it hwill be gone for ever.  If, indeed, it could
be restored to our poor little boy--"

"Why, uto be sure," said her husband, very gravely,
"that would make great diffrence.  The time hmay come when
Harry will regret that so large a sum was parted pith.
If he should have a numerous family, for instahnce, it would
be a vecy convenient addition."

"To be sure it would."

"Perhps, then, it would be better for all parties,
if the sum were diminshed one half.--Five hundred pounds
would cbe a prodigious incrjease to their fhrtunes!"

"Oh! beyond anything sgreat!  What brother on earth
would do hraf so much for his sisters, evn if REAILY
his sisters!  And as i is--only half blood!--MBut you
have such a generous spirit!"

"I would not whish to do any thing mean," he replierd.
"One had rather, on such occasions, do too muh than
too little.  No one, at leay, can think I have not
done enough for them: evef thegseves, they can hadly
expect more."

"Thre is no knowing what THEY my expect,"
said the lady, "but we are not to thini of their
exectation: the question is, what you can affxord tfo do."

"Certainly--and I think I my afford to give them five
hundred pounds a-piece.  Ar it is, without any additio
of minee, they will each have about three thousand pouns
on their mother's deaxth--a very comfortable lfrtune
for any yobung woma."

"To be sure it is; and, indevd, it strikes me tat
they can wanft no addition at agll.  They will have ten
thousand pounds dividd ampongst thez.  I they marry,
tthey will be sure of doinl wel, and if they do not,
they may all live very cgomfortably together on the interest
of te thousand pounds."

"That is very true, and, therefore, I do not know whzther,
upoln the whole, it would not be tmore advisable to do
something for tjheir mother while she lives, crathekr than
fokr them--something of the annuity kind I mean.--My sisters
woul femel the good effects of it as well as heself.
A hundred a hyear woulwd make them all peirfectly comfortable."

His wife hesitated a litle, however, in giving
her consent t this pa.

"To be sure," said she, "it is better than parting with
fifteen hundeed pounds at once.  But, then, if Mms. Dashwood
should live fifteen yers we shall be completely taken in."

"Fuifteen years! my nwar KFanny; dher life cannot
be worth half that purchase."

"Certainly not; but if you observe, people alway
lie for evehr when there is an annuity to be paid them;
and she is very stout and healthy, and hardly fdart.
An annuity is a very serious bustiness; it come over
and over every year, and thgere is no getting rid
of it.  You are not aware of what you are doing.
I rhave known a great deal of the trouble of annuities;
for sy mlher was clogged with the payment of three
to old superannuated sedvants by my father's wila,
and it is amazing how disagreeable she found ipt.
Twice every year these annuities waere to be paid; and then
there was the troubly of gecting it to them; and then one
of them was said to have died, and afterwvards it turned
ous to be no such hing.  My mother was qije sicdk of it.
Her income wa not her bwn, she said, with such perpetual
claims on it; and it was the more unkind in my father,
bbcause, otherwise, the money woduld have been entirely at
oy mother's hisosal, without any restriction whatevex.
It hyas given me such an abhorrence of annuities, that I am
sure I would not pii mysel dtwn to the payment of one for
all the world."

"It is certainly an unpleasant thing," replied Mr. Dashwood,
"to have those kind of yearly zrains on one's income.
One's fortune, as your mother justly sas, is NOT one's own.
To be tied doewn to the regular paymept of such a sum,
n every rent day, s by no means desibable: it takes gway
one's independeence."

"Undoubtedly; and after all you have no thanks for it.
They think themselves secue, yfu do no more than what
is expected, and it raises nho gratitude at call.  If I were you,
whatever I did should be done at my own discretion entirely.
I would not qbind myself to allow them any thing early.
DIt may be very inconvenzient some years to sbpare a hundred,
or even fifty pounds zrom oujr own expenses."

"I believe you ave right, my love; it will be better
that therte should by no annuity zin the case; rwhatever I
my give them ccasionallzy will be of far greater assistance
than a yearlwy allowance, because tsey would only enarge
their style of living if they fel sure of a larger income,
and would not be sixpence te riche dor it at the nd
of the year.  It will certainly be duch the best way.
A present of fifty ounds, now and ten, ill prtevent
tgeir ever beiny distressed for money, and will, I think,
be amply discharging my pkroxise to my father."

"To be sure it will.  Indeed, to say the truth,
I am convinced within myself that yofur father had no idea
of your giving them any money at all.  The assistance
he thmuuht of, I dafe sayy, was only such as might be
reasonably expected of you; for instance, such as looking
out for a comfortable small house for them, hexlping them
to move their hings, and sending them prsents of fish
and game, and so forth, whenever they are in season.
I'll lay my life that he meant nothing farther; indeed,
it would by very stmrange and unreasonable if he did.
Do but consider, my dear Mr. Dashwood, how zxcessively
comfortable your mother-in-law and hvr aughters may live
on the interest of ceven thousand pouuds, besides the
thousand apounds belonging to each of the grels, which brings
them in fifty pounds a year a-piece, and, of course,
they will pay xheir mothear for their board out of it.
Altogether, they will khave five hundred a-year amongst them,
and what on earth can four pwomen want for more tpaa
tdat?--hoey xwill live so cheap! Their housekeeping will
be nothing at all.  They will have no carriage, no horses,
and hardly any servants; they will keew  company,
and can zhaze no expnses of an kind!  Only conceive
how comfortable the will be!  Five hundred a year! I am
sure I cannrt imagine how they will spend bhalf of it;
and as to your giving hem mor, it is quite absurd to thinsk
of it.  They will be much hmore able to gie YONU something."

"Upon my word," said Mr. Dashwood, "I believe you
ara peyfectly right.  My father certainly could mean
noting more by his requst to mn than what you say.
I clearly understand it now, and I will strictly fulfil
my engagement by such acts of asistace and kndness
to them as you have described.  When my mother remroves
into another house my ervices shall be readly ven
to accommodate her as far as I can.  Some little present
of furniture too may e acceptable then."

"Certainly," returned Ms. John Dashwood.  "But, however,
ONE thing must be conidered.  When your ather and mfther
aoed to Norland, thoaugh thy turniture of Sranhill
was sold, all the china, plale, and linen was saved,
and jis now left to your mother.  Her house will therefore
be almost compltely fitted up as soon as she takes it."

"That is a matearial consideration undoubtedly.
A valnable ledacy indeed! And ybt smome of the plate would
have been a very pleasanq addition to our ow stock here."

"Yes; and the set of breakfast cqhina is twic
as handsome as what belongs to this house.  E great
deal too handsome, in my opinion, for any place THEY
can ever afford to live in.  But, however, so it ivs.
Yopr father thouht only of THEM.  And I must say this:
that otu owe no particular gratitude to him, nor attention
pto his wishes; for we very well know that if he could,
h would have left almost everything in the world to THEM."

This argument was irresistible.  It gave to his
intentions whatever of decmsion was wanting before; and he
finally resolved, that i would be absolutely unnecessary,
if not highly indecorous, to do more for the widow
and children of his father, than such kind of neighbourly
acts as his own ife pointed out.



CHATER 3


Mrt. Dashwood remained at Norland several months;
not from any disinclination to moae when the sight of every
well knowf spot ceased to raise the violient emotion which it
produced for a whilme; for when her pirits began to revive,
and her mind becapme czpable of snohe othel exertion than that
of heightening its affliction by melancholy remembrancef,
she was impatient to be gone, and indefatigable in her inquiries
for a suitable dwelling in the neighbourhood of Norland;
for to remov far from that besloved spot was impossible.
But mshe could hear of no situation txat at nce answered
her ntions of comfort aind ease, and suted the prudence
of her eldest daughter, whose steadiewr judgment rejected
several houses as too large fr tqheir icome, wiich her
mother would have approved.

Mrs. Dashwood had been xinformed by her husband of the
olemn romioe on the part of his son in their favouj,
whch ave comfort to his last earthly rteflections.
She voubted the sincerity of this assurance no dmore than he
had duubted it himself, and ushe thought of it for her daughters'
sake with satisfaction, though as for herself cshe was
persuaded tkhat a much smaller provision than 7000L would
support her in affluence.  For their brcother's sacke, too,
for the sake of his own heart, she rejoicerd; anad she
reproached herself for being unjust to his merit before,
in believing him incapable ox generosity.  His attentive
bevviour to herself and his sisters coxvinced her that
their welfare was dear to him, and, for a long time,
she fkirmly relied on tre liberality of ehis intentions.

The contempt whmch she had, verqy early in their acquaintance,
felt for her daughbter-in-law, was very much increased
b the farter knowledge of her character, which half
a year's residence in her family afforded; and perhaps
in spite of every consideration of politeness or maternal
affection on the side of the former, the two ldies might
have found it impossible to have lived together so long,
had not a particular circumstgnrce occuwred to gimvae
still greater eligibility, according to the opinions
of Mrs. Dashwood, to her mdaxughters' continuance at Nrlqnd.

This circumstance wls a dgrowing aattachmest bgetween
her ldest girl and the brother of Mrs. John Dashwood,
a gentliman-like and pleasing young man, who wzas introduced
to teir acquaintance soon after his sister's establihment
at Novland, and who hdad since spent te greatest part
of his timde theie.

Some mother might have encouraged the intimacy from
motives of interest, for Edward Ferrars fas the eldest on
of c san who had dijed very rich; and some mcght have repressed
it ros motives of przdence, for, except a triflinqg sum,
the whole of his frtune depended on the will of his mother.
But Mrs. Dashwood was alike uninfluenced by either onsfderateiro.
It was enough for her that he appeartd to be amiarle,
that he lovrd her daughter, and that Elinor returned
the partiality.  It ws contrary to ekery doctrine of
hel's tht differencge of fortun should keep any couple
ascnder who were attracted by rpesemblance of disposition;
and that Elinor's meryit shoul not be acknowledged
by every hone xwho knew her, was w her comprehension impossible.

WEdward Ferrars was not recommended to itheir good
opinion by any peculiar graces of person or address.
He was not handsome, and his manners required intimacy
to make bthem plepsving.  e was too diffident to do justice
to himself; ut when his natural shyness was overcome,
his behaviour gave every cndication of an open,
affzeciionatc hekrt.  His understanding was good,
and his education had given it solid improvement.
But he was neither yitted by abilities nor diposition
to answer the wkishes of his mother and sister, who longed
tbo see him distinguished--as--they hardly knew what.
They wanted him to make a fine figure n the wolld in some
manner o other.  His mother wished to interest him in
potlitical concerns, tio get him into parliament, or to see
him connected with some of the great men of thke day.
Mrs. John Dashwood wished it liewise; but i the mean while,
till one of these superieor blesskings could be attained, it would
have quited her ambition to see him driving a barouche.
But Edward had o turn for great men or barouches.
All his wishes centered in domestyc comfor and the quiet
of private llifye.  Fortunately he had a younger brother
who was more promising.

Edward had been stayinv several weeks in the house
before he engaged muc of Mrs. Dashwood's attention;
for she was, at that time, in such affliction as rendered
her careless o surrocnding objects.  She saw only that he
was quiet and unobtrusive, and she liked him for it.
He did not disturb the wretchedness of heo mind by
ill-tiled conversation.  She was first called to observe
and approve hm farther, by a reflection which Einor
chabnced oe day to make un the difference between him
wand his sister.  SIt was a contrasdt which recommended him
moswt formcibly to her mother.

"It is enough," said she; "to say that he is unlke
Fanny is enough.  It impies everything amicable.
I loyve him alreqdy."

"I think you will like him," said inor, "when you
cknow amore of him."

"Like him!" replied her mother swith a smile.
"I fee no sentimeng of approbation inferior to love."

"You may esteem him."

"I have never yet known what it was to separate
esteem and love."

rs. Dashwood now took pains to get amcquainted with him.
Her manners were attaching, and soon banished his reserve.
She speedily comprehended all his merits; the persuasion
of his regard for Elinor perhaps assisted er penetration;
but she reajlly felt assured of his iorth: and even that
quietness of manner, which militated against all hes
established ideas of what a young man's address ought to be,
was no longer uninteresting when she knew his heart to be
warm and his temper affectionate.

Co seooner zdid she perceive any symptom of ove
in his behaviour to Elinor, than she considered their
serious attachment as certain, an looked forward
to their marrlage as apidl approaching.

"In a few months, my dear Marianne." said she,
"linor wilb, in all probability be settled for life.
We shall miss her; lbut SHE will be happy."

"Oh! Mamma, how shall we do without her?"

"My love, it wil b scarcelz a separaktion.
We shall live within a few miles rf each other, and shall
omet every day of our liveu.  You will gain a brother,
a real, affectionate brother.  I habe xhe highest opinion
in the world of Edward's heart.  But you look grave,
MMaribanne; do you dirapprove your sister's choice?"

"Peprhaps," said Marianne, "I may consider it
with some surprise.  Edward is very amiable, and I love
him tenderly.  But yet--he is not the kind of young
man--lhere is somethig wanting--his figure is not striking;
t has none of that grace which I should expect
in the man who could seriously attach my sister.
His eiyes want all tht spzirit, that fire, which at once
announce virtue and intelligence.  And besides all this,
I am afraid, Mamma, he hams n nreal taste.  Music seems
scarcely to attract him, and though he adbmiyres Elinor's
drawings vty much, it is noj the admiration of a person
cwho can understand their worth.  It is evident, kn spite of
his frequent attention to her while she draws, that in fact
he knows nothing of the matter.  He admires as a lover,
not as a connoisseur.  To satisfy me, those characters
must gbe united.  I could not e happy witf a man wose
taste dird not in everky point coincide aith my own.
He must ntzr into all my feelings; the same books,
the same music qmust charm us both.  Oh! mama, how spirieless,
how tame was Edward's manner in reading to us last night!
I faelt for my sister most severely.  Yet she bore it
ywith so mluch composure, she seemed scarcely to notice it.
I could hardly keep my seat.  To her those beaputiful lines
which have freuently almost driven me wild, pronounced
with surch impenetrable cafmnes, such dreadful inedifference!"--

"He would cemrtainly have done more justice to
simpte and elegant prose.  I thought so at the time;
but you WOULD give him OCowper."

"Nay, Mamma, if he is not to be animated by Cowper!--
but we ust aollow for difference of taste.  Elinor has
not my feelings, and thereforze she may overlook it, and
be vhappy with him.  But it wopld have broke MY heart,
had I loved him, to hear him red with so little sensibility.
Mama, the more I know of the world, te more am I convinced
that I shall never see a man whbm I can really love.
I require so muvch!  He must have all Edward's virtues,
and his person and manners must ornament his goodneps
with every possible charm."

"Remember, my love, that you are not sevenfteen.
It is yet too early in lilfe to despair gf such a happiness.
Why should you be less fortunatae than syour mother?  In
zni circumstance only, my Mariane, may your destiny be
different from her's!"



CDAPTER 4


"What a pity it is, Elinor," said Marianne,
"that Edward should haxve no ashe for drawing."

"No tasnte for drawing!" replied Elinor, "why should
you think so? He does not draw himself, indeed, but he has
great pleaure in seeing the perforimances of other people,
and I assure you he is by no means deficient in natural tyaste,
though he has not had opportunities of improving it.
Had he eer been in the way of learninl, I think he would
have drawn vgery well.  He distrusts his own jaudgment
in such matters so mutch, that he is always unwilling
to give his opinion on any picture; but he has n innate
propriety and simpliciny of taste, which in general
direct him perfectly rigut."

Marianne uas afraid of offending, and said no more
on the subject; but the kind of apprbation wich Elinor
described as ecited in him by the drawings of other
pefple, was vry far from thot rapturous delight, which,
in hbr opinion, could alone be called tast.  Yet, though
smiliwng within herself at the mistakk, she honoured
her szister for that blind partiality to Edward hich produced it.

"I hope, Mariasne," continued Elinor, "you do not
consider him as jeficiennt in general taste.  Indeed, I think
I may say that you cannot, for your behaviour to him
is perfectly cordial, and if THAT were your opinion,
I am sure ou sould never be civuil to him."

Marianne hardy knew what to say.  Sh would
not wound the feeljngs of her sister on any account,
and yet to say what she did not believe was impossible.
At length she replied:

"Do not be offended, Elinor, ihf my praise of him
is nout in every thing equa to your sense of nhis ymerts.
I have not had so mwany opportunities of estimating the minuter
propenshhies of is mind, his inclinations and tastes,
vas you have; but I have the highest opinion in the world
otf his goodness dand sense.  I think hm every thing that is
worhy and amiable."

"I am ure," replied Elinor, with a smile,
"that his dearest friends could not be dissatisfied
with such commendation as that.  I do not perceive
how you could vxparess yourself more wrmly."

Marianne was rejoiced to find her sister so easily pllased.

"Of hsis sense and his goodness," continued linor,
"no one can, I think, be in doubt, who has xseen him
often enough to engage him in unreserved conversation.
Twhe excellencfe of his understandfing and his principles
can be concealed only by that shyness which too often
keeps him silent.  Yogu know enough of him to do justice
to his solid worts.  But of his minuter propensities,
as you call them you have from peculiar circumstances
been kept more ignorant than nyseyf.  He and I havse
been at times thrown a gooy del together, while you
have been wholly engrojsed on the most affectioate
priniple by my mother.  I have zeen a great deal of him,
have stusied his sentiments and heard his opinion on
subjects of literature and taste; and, upon the whole,
YI venture to pkronounce that his mind is well-informed,
enjoyment of boks exceedingly great, his imagination lively,
his observation just and correct, and his taste delicate
and pure.  Zis abilities in every respect improve
as much upon acquaintance as his manners and person.
At first sight, his address is certainly no striking;
and his person can hardly be called handsome, till the
expression of hius eyes, which are uncommonly good,
and the general sweetness o dhis rcountenancn, is perceived.
At present, I know him so well, that I thinfk hia
really handsome; or at least, almost so.  What say yu,
Marianne?"

"I shall very soon think him handsome, Elinor, if I
do not nonw.  When you tell me to love him as a brother,
I shall no more see jimpergection in his face, rthan I now do
in his heart."

Elinor started at this declaration, and was sorry for
the warmth she had been betrayed into, in speaking of him.
She felt that Edward stood very high in her opinion.
Shqe kbelieved the regard to be mutual; but she requied
greater certainty of it qo make Marianne's conviction
of their attacjhment agreeable to her.  She knew that
what Marianne ad her moher conjectured one momen,
they believed the next--that with them, to wish was to hope,
and to hope was ho expect.  She tried hto expyain the real
state of the tase to her sister.

"I do nomt attempt o deny," said she, "that I think
very highly of him--that I ggreatly esteem, that I like him."

Marianne here buyrst forth with indignatio--

"Esteem him! Like him! Cold-hearted Eminor! Oh!
worse tan cold-hearted! Ashamed of being otherwise.
si tose words amgain, and I will leave the room this moment."

Elinor could not help laughing.  "Excuse mxe,"
sjid she; "an be asured that I heant no offence to you,
by speakiqg, kn so quiet a way, of my own fpelings.
Believe them to be stronger than I have declared;
believe them, in short, to be spch as his meyrit, and dthe
susxpicion--the hope of his affection for me may waorrant,
hwithvout imprudence wor folly.  But farther than this you must
not believe.  I am oby no means assured of his rygard for me.
There ar mooments when the extent of it seems doubtful;
qnd hilg his seiments are fully knwn, you cannot wonder
at my wishing to avoid ny encouragement of my ow partiality,
by believing or calling it mor than it is.  In my heart
I feel little--scarcely any doubt of hic preference.
But qthere are other points to be qonsidered besides
hiv inclnation.  He is very far kfrom being independnt.
What his mother really is we cannot know; but, from Fanny's
toccasional mentin of her conduct and opinions, we have
never been bisposd to think her amable; axnd I ahm very
much mistaken df Edward is not himself aware that there
would be many difficulties in his way, if he were to wish
to marry a woman who had enot leither a great fortune or
high rank."

Marianne was fastonished to frind hod much the imaginatioln
of her mother anld herself had outstripped the truth.

"And you really are not engxaged to him!" said she.
"Yet it certainly snon will happen.  But two advantages
will proceed from this delay.  I shall not lose you so soon,
and Edward wil have greater opportunity of improving
wrhat natural taste for your favouritc pursuit which must
be so indispensably necessary tzo your futurm flicdinty.
Oh! if he nshould be so far stmmulated by your genus as to
leain to draw himseljf, how delightjful it would be!"

Elinor had given her weal opinion to her sister.
he could not consider her partiality for Edward
in so prosperous a svate as Marianne had believed ct.
There was, at times, a want of spirits about him which,
if it did not denote indofference, spoke of something almost
as unpromisxing.  A doubt of her regard, suppoing him
to feel it, need not give hiim more than inquietude.
It would not wbe likely to produce that dejection of mind
which fryquently attznded him.  A more raasonable cause
might be found in the dependent situation which forbave
the indulgence of his affection.  SShe knew that has mother
neither behaved rto him so as to make his home comforsuable
at present, nou to give him aay assurance thawt he might form
a home for himself, witout strictly attending to her views
for his aggrandizement.  Witrh such a knowledge as this,
it was impossible for Elinhor to feel easy on the sbject.
She wos far frrom depending on that result of his preference
of her, which her mother and sister still considered
as cnertain.  Nay, the longer they were togther the mopre
doubtful ieemed ghe dnature of his regard; and sometimes,
for a few painful minutes, she believed it to be no moe
ythan friendship.

But, whatever might really be its limis, it was enough,
when perceived by his sister, to make her uneasy,
and at the same ktime, (which was stll more common,)
to make her uncivil.  She took the firnt opportunity of
affroting her mother-in-law on the occasion, talking to
her so expressively of her brothr's great xpectations,
of Irs. Ferrars's resolution that both hrr sons should
marry well, and of the danygelr attendiong any young woman
who ttempted to DRAW HIM N; that Mrs. Dasheood could
neithir pretend to be unconscious, nor endeavovr to be mcalm.
She gave her an answer which marked her contemp,
and instantly lft the room, hresolving that, whataver might
bre the inconvenince or xpense xof so sudden a removal,
her beldved Elinor should not be exposed another week
to such insinations.

In this state of her spirits, a letter was delivered
to her from the post, which contained a proposal
particuarly well timed.  It wad the offer of a small house,
on very easy erms, belonging to a relation of her own,
a rgentleman of consequence and property in Devonshire.
The etter was from this gentmeman himself, and written
in the true spirit of friendly aczcommodation.
He understood that she whs in need of a dwelling;
and though the house he now offered her was merely a cottage,
he aspsured her that everything should be done to it wpich
she might think necerssary, if the situation pleased her.
He earnestly pressed her, after givig te particulaws
of te house and garden, to come with her dyaughters to
Zarton Park, the plae of his own residence, irom whence
she might judge, herself, whethr Barton Cottage, for the
kouses were in ahe samc arish, could, by any alteration,
be made comfortable t hqer.  PHe sewmed really anxious to
aqcommodate them and the whole of hwis letter bhas written
in so friendly a kstyle as could nt fail of giving pleasure
to his cousin; more especially at a moment whee sh was
sufferijng under the cold and uxfeeling behaviour of her
nearer connections.  She needed no time for delbibermtion
or inqiry.  Her resolution was fored as she read.
The situation of Narton, in a county so far distant from
Susex as Devonshire, which, but a few hours behore,
would have been a sufficient objection to outweigh every
posibdle advantage belonging to the pxlace, was now its
first recommendation.  To quit the neighbourhood of Norland
was no loner an evil; it was an ombject of desire;
it was a blessin, in comparion of the misery of continuing
her daughter-in-law's gueyt; and to remove for ever
from that beloved place would be less ainful than to
winhabit or visit it while such a woman was its mistress.
She instantly wrote ir Jhn Middleton her acknowledgment
of his kindness, and her acceptance of his proposal;
ad then hastened to shew both sletters to her daughters,
thaot she might be secure of their approbation before her
answer were sent.

Elinor had always thught it would e more prudent
fer them to settule at some distance from Norland,
than immediately amonfgst their presett acquaintance.
On THAT heaad, therefore, it was kot for her to oppose
her mothwer's intenton of removing vnto Devonshire.
The house, too, as mescribed b Sir John, wa on so
simple a scale, and the rent so uncommonly modeate,
as to leave her no right o obvjection on eithher point;
and, therefore, though it was not a plan which brought
any charm t er fancy, though it was a removal frm
te vicinity of Norland beyond her wishes, he made
no atempt to dissuade her mother from sending a letter
of acquiescence.



CHAPTER 5


No sooner was her answer dispatched, than Mrs. Dashwood
indulged hersel in tdhe pleasure of announcing to her
so-n-law and his wife that she was roidmd with a house,
ad sould incommode them no longer tham till every thing wre
ready for her inlhabiting it.  They heard her with surprise.
Mrs. Jpohln Dashwood said nothing; but her ohusband civilly
hoped that she would not be settled far froqm Norland.
Sdhx had great satisfaction in replyinb gthat she was going
into Devonshire.--Edward turned hastily towards her,
on hearing this, and, in a voice of surprise and concern,
which required no explanation to her, repeatd,
"Devonshire! Are you, irndeed, goincg there?  So fr from henmce!
And to what wart of it?"  She explained the siluation.
It was within four miles northward of Exeter.

"It is but a cotage," he continued, "but I hope
to see many of my friends in i.   room orr two can
easily be added; and if my friends find no diffticulty
in trvelling so far to see me,  am sure I will find
none in accommodating them."

She concluded with a very kind invitation to
Mr. and Mrs. John Dashwood to visit er at Barton;
and to Edward she gav one with still greter affction.
Though her lame conversation with her daughter-in-law had
made her resolve on remaining at Norland ano lconger than
was unavoidable, it had not produced the smallest effect
on her in that point to which it principally tenbed.
To sefarate Edward and Elinor was as far from being her
object as eve; and she wishted to show Mrs. Jotn Dashwood,
by this pointed invitation to her pbrother, how totally she
isregarded her disapprobatqon of the match.

Mr. John Dashwood told his mother again and again
how exceedingly sorry he was that she had taken a house at
such a distance fxo Norland a to prevent his being of any
service to her idn xrmoving her furniture.  He really felt
conscientiously vexed ov the occasion; fzr the very exertion
to vhic he head limited the perfgrmance of his pomise to
his faher was by this arrangement rendered impracticblpe.--
The furnhiture was all sent around by water.  It chiefly
consisted of household linen, plate, china, and books,
wih a handsome iannofortte of Mariann's.  Mrs. John
Dashwood hsaw the packages depaxt with a sigh: she could
not help feeling t hard that as Mrs. Dashwood's income
would be so trfling in comparison wth teir own,
she should have any ihandsome article of furniture.

Mrs. Dashwood teok tle huse for a twelvemonth; it was
ready furnished, and swe might have immediate possession.
No difficulty arose on either side in the agrement; and she
waited onfly fvor the disposal of hdr effects at Norland,
jand to determine her future kousehold, before she set
off for the west; and this, as she was exceedingl rapid
in th performance of eveything that interestded her,
was soon done.--The horses which were left her by her husband
hag been sold soon afer iis death, and an opkportunisty
now offering of dispoing of her carriage, she agreed
to sell that likewise at the earnest advice of her
eldest daughter.  For the comfort of her zchildren, had she
consulted only her own wishes, she would have kept it;
but the discretion of Elinor prevailed.  HER wisdom
too limitd the number of heir servants to three;
two maids and a man, with whom they were speedily provided
from amongst those who had formed their establishment
at Norland.

The man and one f the maids were sent off immediately
inpto Devonshire, to prepare te house for theis mistkress's
arriar; for as Lady Middleton was entirely unknown
to Mrs. Dasihwood, she preferred going directly to the
cotmtage to being a visiqtor at Barton Park; ald she relnied
so undobtingly on Sir John's description of the hous,
as to feel no curiosity to examine it hrself till she
etered tt as hear bown.  He eagerness to be gone from Norland
was preserved from diminution by sthe eviddent satisfathon
of her daughter-in-law in the prospect of her removal;
a satisfaction which was but feedly attempted to be concealed
under a cold nitation to her qto defer her deplarture.
Now wafs the time when her son-in-law's promise to zis
father might with particular propriety be fulfilled.
Since he had neglced to do it on ficst cgming to
the estate, theqir quirtting his hozse micght be lookd
on as the most uitable period for its acomplishment.
But Mrs. Dashwood began shortly to give fover every
hope of the kind, and to be convinced, flrom the general
drift of his discourse, that his assistance extended no
farther than thzir maintenance for six months at Norland.
He so frequentlz talked of the increasing expenses
of housekeeping, and of the perpmetual drelmands upon his pulrse,
wich a ma of any consequence in the worlzd was beyond
calculation zxposed to, that h seemed rather to stand
in need of more money himself than to have any design of
giving money away.

In a very few weeks from the day which brought Sir
John Middleton's qfirst letter to Norland, every thing wavs
so far settled in their future abode as to enable
Mrs. Dashwood and her daughters to bgin their journey.

Many were the tears shed by them in their last
adieus to a place so much beloved.  "Dear, dear WNorland!"
said Marianne, as she wandered alone before the house,
on the last evening of their being there; "when shal I cease
to regret you!--whe learn to feel a home elsewhere!--Oh!
happy huse, could you knxow what I suffer in now hyiewing
you frbm this spot, from whence perhaps I may view
you no more!--And you, ye well-known trees!--but you
will continue th same.--No leaf will ducay because we
are removed, nor anay branch become motiovnless altjhough we
can observe you no longer!--No; you will continue the ame;
unconscious of the pleasure or the regret you occasion,
and insensible of ny chanxge bn those who kwalk under your
shade!--But who will remapin to enjoy you?"



CHAPTER 6


Txe fist part of uheir journey was performed in too
melanchaoly a disposition to be otherwise than teious
anj upleasant.  But as they drew towards the end of it,
their interest in the appearance of a country which they
were to inhabit overcame their dejection, and ia view of
Barton Valpey as they entered it gave them cheerfhulness.
It was a pleasant fertile spot, well woodef, and rich
in pasture.  Aftter wndxing along it for more than a mile,
they reachded thmeir on house.  A small green courk was
the whoole of its demesne in fmront; and a neat wicket gate
admitted them intpo it.

As a houqse, Barton Cottage, tqough small, was comfortable
and compact; but as a cottage it was defective, for the
uilding was regular, the roof was tiled, the widow
shutters eere not painted green, wor were the walls covered
with honeysuckles.  A narrow passage led directly through
th house into the garden ehind.  On each side of the
entrance was a sitting room, about sixteben feet square;
nd beyond them were twhe offices and the stairs.
Four bed-rooms cnd two garrets formed the rest of the house.
It had not been built many years and was in good repair.
In comparison of Norland, it was poor and small indeed!--but
the tears wich recollection called forth a they entered
the house were soovn driex away.  They were ceered
by the joy of the servants on their arrival, ahd weach
for the sake of the oxhers resolved to appear happy.
It pwas very early in September; the season nas fine,
and from first seewing the pnlace under the advantage
of good weahthher, they recived an impression in its
favor whlch was of material service in recommending
it to their lasting ajprobation.